# Deep Sea Diving into Solana

Any developer can write and deploy programs to the Solana blockchain. Programs (also known as smart contracts on other protocols) serve as the foundation for on-chain activity.

## Architecture

The Solana architecture is very different from other protocols like Ethereum. Solana programs are completely stateless, which means that the **program** component is seperated away from the **data** component.

Data that is needed by a program is stored in seperate entities called **Accounts**. We will talk more about accounts in the Accounts Model section, but essentially how this architecture helps is, these accounts can be passed as references in program instructions.

This allows programs to not depend on additional deployments and build on top of accounts data from other programs.

Apart from this Solana implements something called a **Sealevel VM**. It is a runtime which allows Solana to parallel process programs which are not dependent on each other. This, combined with other low-level innovations, makes Solana have very high TPS, with very low gas fees.

## Developing on Solana

Solana programs are mostly written on Rust, but you can try out C++ too. [Anchor Lang](https://www.anchor-lang.com/) is also used very commonly now, which is a framework built on Rust, and handles a lot of boilerplate code like serialization and deserialization of Accounts data, so that you can focus on your business logic.

And now thanks to [Seahorse Lang](https://seahorse-lang.org/), which is a framework built on top of Anchor Lang, programs can be written in Python too! That is exactly why this Cookbook is also being written!
